# The Fisherman and the Monk

At the base of a great monastery flowed the mighty Li river. There lived a lowly fisherman. He came from a long line who had toiled to make a life catching and selling whatever they could from those waters. So completely had this life defined his family that he was named "He" which meant "river or stream." 

Monks from the monastery would buy fish that He caught. Occasionally, He would climb the arduous staircase named "The Ten Thousand Steps" to sell extra fish to very grateful monks. Doubtless, he needn't make the trek to sell fish. Instead, He did it to see the wonderful things done and kept there. He wondered at the skill of the monks, the beautiful construction of their buildings, and the sweet fragrance of camphor and sandalwood that entranced his imagination. 

Wonderful as it all was, He grew more uneasy about his visits. He began to notice how much more like fish and river he smelled than incense. The monks he spoke with had close shaved heads that seemed like brass orbs open to the mysteries of the heavens while his own was bound to float up and downstream, ignorant of those more excellent things.

Eventually, He stopped climbing those steps. When monks would visit him, he kept his head bowed and eyes low to avoid their gaze. Surely they thought of him as a dullard -- an uncultered simpleton. Eventually, he avoided the monks altogether.

One steamy summer evening, he was disturbed by a knock on his door. He had been preparing to take his boat our for an evening fish. Upon opening his door and to his alarm, a monk politely greeted him. The man's body was lithe and strong though he was well on in years. "Hello friend," said the monk. "My name is Ling. I fear I've overestimated my strength and won't be able to ascend the Ten Thousand Steps before the moonless night arrives." He silently stared for an uncomfortable time before hastily stepping out and shutting his door. In an instant, the near forgotten feelings of shame flooded over him. He had been cleaning fish for drying and worried that the smell would be offensive to the serene-looking month. "Y-yes. I've climbed those steps many times myself. It will be dangerous for you to return now." 

Another pregnant pause hung in the air. Ling gently swatted swarming river insects away from his face. All at once, He realized why the monk was at his door. He...he wanted to be invited to stay the night! Panic swirled and mixed into his anxiety. But, what could be done? He would surely offend the monk and certainly hospitality itself should he refuse. Meekly, he offered, "Y-you should stay here...uh with me tonight," adding quickly, "...that is...of course...if you want to." The monk's demeanor didn't shift from it's solid serenity. "How kind. Yes, I would stay with you." 

What followed was a hasty and meager supper of dried fish, rice, and fermented bean curd. Ling ate it with a surprising relish.  As they ate and talked, He found his heart calmed somewhat. He told the Ling how he admired the monastery and the monks. He shared how he had made special trips up Ten Thousand Steps just so he could speak to the other monks and smell the sweet incense. "Why did you stop?" queried Ling. Fresh feelings of embarassment and even guilt arose for He. Ling had clearly not been offended by his smelly home or his humble food. Why had he stopped? "Forgive me..." whispered He, "I...am not like the monks there. I am not wise or, or intelligent enough to..." He paused. Ling smiled and slowly nodded, inviting him to continue without fear. He screwed up his courage and blurted out, "I am not strong enough, intelligent enough, patient enough, dedicated enough, mindful enough...special enough to be a monk!" 

Another long pause lingered for what seemed to He as an eternity. Ling, for his part, didn't disturb the discomfort by speaking. What did, was strange indeed. A sound like low, gutteral chirping. First one, then several in chorus began. "What is that noise?" asked Ling. "That noise tells me I must go to the river and fish. Those are my birds." He explained to Ling that he used trained cormorants to catch the fish he ate and sold for his livelihood. In all his travels, Ling had never heard of such a thing. "May I accompany you?" he asked. After his outburst, the fisherman felt that he had nothing left to hide from Ling. He nodded and the two went out together.

Night has fallen as the two men climbed into the fisherman's small watercraft. He hung a lantern at the bow and the stern, and pushed off into the inky water. Ling whispered, "How do you catch fish?" The fisherman replied, "Well, I'm not the one who catches the fish. My birds do that." Puzzled, Ling wondered aloud, "how do these birds know to share their catch with you?" "Naturally, they do not. I've raised each of these birds since they were eggs. They live with me. I keep them warm, treat them when they are ill, and..." he paused "...and mourn them when they die." The monk allowed a slow smile to crack across his serene features. "Well, I'm anxious to see how a fisherman catches fish without knowing how to catch fish!" Something warm proceeded from the fisherman's chest into the tips of his fingers and toes. He was tingling with excitement!

The birds sat perched on the edges of the fisherman's boat. He tied slender threads around each bird's neck. "Are those to keep your birds from escaping?" Ling wondered aloud. "You really dont' know? I thought monks knew everything!?" He replied. "No! I have never seen the like of it." Like a delighted child, open and playful, the fisherman laughed, "Ha! Just wait and see!"

Without warning, one of the birds lept into the water, piercing it like a lance. There was hardly a spash or a sound. After mere seconds, the bird returned with a huge fish in its gullet. "Do you see now!?" exclaimed the fisherman as loudly as he dared. Ling was puzzled and said nothing. Like lightning, his other 7 birds dove beneath the surface just as the fisherman scooped the first bird into the boat. There, He whispered to the bird and gently massaged the bird's throat until it dropped its fish onto the deck. "That one's for me!" He said. Soon after, the other 7 emerged. All but one had secured its own fish. The fisherman's excitement had infected the monk. Ling too leaned carefully over the side and helped hoist each bird back into the boat.

After several more minutes of this frenetic dance, it was over. The boat was full of fish! Gratefully, the fisherman removed the string from his beloved birds and tossed each of them a well-earned fish. It was at this point, the month finally understood. "They can't swallow the fish! That's it isn't it? That's the purpose of the string! They can catch far more than they can possibly eat, so you prevent them for a time then reward them from their own labor. You raise and nurture them so they feel no fear of you. Indeed, the string doesn't keep them from escaping -- your love for them does." He paused as the wave of wonder broker over him like the waves of the river. "What knowledge, skill, fortitude, patience, and genius you wield!"

The fisherman beamed with pride, and nodded.