single fisherman lived all his life in the shadow of the monastery. humble life, father, grandfather, etc were all simple fisherman. They fish with cormorants.

The fisherman sells his fish to the monks. while at the monastery, he wonders at their skill 

monk is exhausted at the bottom of "one thousand step" hill. Night time, can't climb back. Fisherman talks with him. shares his respect for monks. opines at his simpleness, lack of intelligence, and backwards opinion of himself. he's thought often of ascending the steps and asking to be accepted as an acolyte. he never has. he thinks "i'm not strong enough, intelligent enough, patient enough, special enough, dedicated enough, mindful enough to be accepted.

the monk listens intently as the sun slowly sets. he asks the fisherman to stay the night. the fisherman hastily agrees yet apologizes. he fishes at night with water birds called cormorants and won't be an attentive host. the monk shows interest and asks if he may accompany the fisherman on his nightly fishing trip. with reticence, the fisherman agrees. how could he refuse? and yet, how exposed would he feel? his boat is humble, his birds seem a crude tactic for a fisherman. surely the monk must know advanced things about catching fish that he could only dream of! sensing his silence could offend the monk, the fisherman agrees.

over a light supper of dried fish, rice and fermented bean curd the monk humbly asks questions of the fisherman. "How do you catch fish?" the familiar feeling of embarassment gathers in the fishermans throat as a tightness. "I'm really not the, uh...the one who catches the fish." "oh?" queried the monk. "yes. I...I keep cormorants. they are at home in water and are very skilled at catching and eating fish. It is they, and not I who catch the fish." the monk puzzled, both at using birds to catch fish but at the fisherman's bowed head, cupped shoulders and stammering speach. ignoring the latter, the monk asked "how do these birds know to share their catch with you?" raising his head and relaxing a bit, the fisherman shared, "naturally, they do not. these birds are those I have raised since they were eggs. they live with me. I keep them warm, treat them when they are ill, and..." he paused "...and mourn them when they die." the monk allowed a slow smile to crack across his serene features. "well, I'm anxious to see how a fisherman catches fish without knowing how to catch fish." something warm proceeded from the fisherman's chest into the tips of his fingers and toes. he was tingling with excitment!

the two strangers embarked into the river in the pitch black of night. the fisherman's birds sat perched on teh edges of the fisherman's small watercraft. He lit two torches which he fixed at the bow and stern. in the flickering light, the monk noticed slender threads tied in loops around the birds' necks. "are those to keep your birds from escaping?" he wondered aloud. the fisherman paused his preparation to answer "you...don't know the purpose of these strings?" the monk again smiled in delight. "no! I have never seen the like of it." like a delighted child, open and playful, the fisherman laughed, "Ha! just wait and see."

after paddling for some time, one of the birds lept into the water, piercing it like a lance. there was hardly a splash or a sound. after mere seconds, the bird returned with a huge fish in its gullet. "ha HA, do you see now?" exclaimed the fisherman as loudly as he dared. "Do you see now?" the monk was puzzled and said nothing. Like lightning, his other 7 birds dove beneath the surface just as the fisherman scooped the first bird into the boat. There, he whispered to the bird and gently massaged the bird's throat until it dropped its fish onto the deck. "that one's for me!" he said. Soon after, the other 7 emerged. All but one had secured its own fish. the fisherman's excitement had infected the monk. he too leaned carefully over the side and helped the fisherman hoist each bird back into the boat. 

After several more minutes of this frenetic dance, it was over. the boat was full of fish! gratefully, the fisherman removed the string from his beloved birds and tossed each of them a well-earned fish. it was at this point, the monk finally understood. "they can't swallow the fish! that's it isn't it? that's the purpose of the string! they can catch far more  than they can possibly eat, so you prevent them for a time then reward them from their own labor. your raise and nurture them so they feel no fear of you. indeed, the string doesn't keep them from escaping -- your love for them does." he paused as the wave of wonder broke over him like the waves of the river. "What skill, fortitude, patience, and genius you wield!" 

The fisherman beamed with pride, and nodded.